1. Genome Med. 2022 Sep 24;14(1):110. doi: 10.1186/s13073-022-01112-z.

Longitudinal multi-omics analysis identifies early blood-based predictors of 
anti-TNF therapy response in inflammatory bowel disease.

Mishra N(1), Aden K(1)(2), Blase JI(1), Baran N(1), Bordoni D(1), Tran F(1)(2), 
Conrad C(2), Avalos D(3), Jaeckel C(2), Scherer M(4)(5), Sørensen SB(6)(7), 
Overgaard SH(6)(8)(9), Schulte B(2), Nikolaus S(2), Rey G(3), Gasparoni G(4), 
Lyons PA(10)(11), Schultze JL(12)(13), Walter J(4), Andersen V(6)(7)(9); SYSCID 
Consortium; Dermitzakis ET(3), Schreiber S(#)(14)(15), Rosenstiel P(#)(16)(17).

Collaborators: Banos A, Bertsias G, Beyer M, Boumpas D, Finckh A, Franke A, 
Georges M, Gu W, Häsler R, Jawhara M, Kenyon A, Kratsch C, Krause R, Lauc G, 
Mangino M, Natoli G, Ostaszewski M, Pezer M, Raes J, Rahmouni S, Ramos-Pamplona 
M, Reiz B, Rosati E, Sanoudou D, Satagopam V, Schneider R, Schulte-Schrepping J, 
Sidiropoulos P, Smith KGC, Spector T, Vandeputte D, Vieira-Silva S, Vojta A, 
Warnat-Herresthal S, Zoldoš V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel 
and University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany.
(3)Institute of Genetics and Genomics of Geneva (iGE3), University of Geneva, 
Geneva, Switzerland.
(4)Department of Genetics, University of Saarland, Saarbrücken, Germany.
(5)Present address: Department of Bioinformatics and Genomics, Centre for 
Genomic Regulation, The Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, 08003, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(6)The Molecular Diagnostics and Clinical Research Unit, University Hospital of 
Southern Denmark, Aabenraa, Denmark.
(7)Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, 
Denmark.
(8)Section for Biostatistics and Evidence-Based Research, the Parker Institute, 
Bispebjerg and Frederiksberg Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(9)Institute of Regional Health Research, University of Southern Denmark, 
Odense, Denmark.
(10)Cambridge Institute of Therapeutic Immunology and Infectious Disease, 
Jeffrey Cheah Biomedical Centre, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, CB 0AW, 
UK.
(11)Department of Medicine, University of Cambridge School of Clinical Medicine, 
Cambridge, CB2 0QQ, UK.
(12)Life &amp; Medical Sciences (LIMES) Institute, University of Bonn, Bonn, 
Germany.
(13)PRECISE Platform for Single Cell Genomics and Epigenomics, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), and University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.
(14)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel 
and University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. 
s.schreiber@mucosa.de.
(15)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. s.schreiber@mucosa.de.
(16)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University Kiel 
and University Medical Center Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. 
p.rosenstiel@mucosa.de.
(17)Department of Internal Medicine I, University Medical Center 
Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany. p.rosenstiel@mucosa.de.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Treatment with tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) antagonists 
in IBD patients suffers from primary non-response rates of up to 40%. Biomarkers 
for early prediction of therapy success are missing. We investigated the 
dynamics of gene expression and DNA methylation in blood samples of IBD patients 
treated with the TNF antagonist infliximab and analyzed the predictive potential 
regarding therapy outcome.
METHODS: We performed a longitudinal, blood-based multi-omics study in two 
prospective IBD patient cohorts receiving first-time infliximab therapy 
(discovery: 14 patients, replication: 23 patients). Samples were collected at up 
to 7 time points (from baseline to 14 weeks after therapy induction). 
RNA-sequencing and genome-wide DNA methylation data were analyzed and correlated 
with clinical remission at week 14 as a primary endpoint.
RESULTS: We found no consistent ex ante predictive signature across the two 
cohorts. Longitudinally upregulated transcripts in the non-remitter group 
comprised TH2- and eosinophil-related genes including ALOX15, FCER1A, and OLIG2. 
Network construction identified transcript modules that were coherently 
expressed at baseline and in non-remitting patients but were disrupted at early 
time points in remitting patients. These modules reflected processes such as 
interferon signaling, erythropoiesis, and platelet aggregation. DNA methylation 
analysis identified remission-specific temporal changes, which partially 
overlapped with transcriptomic signals. Machine learning approaches identified 
features from differentially expressed genes cis-linked to DNA methylation 
changes at week 2 as a robust predictor of therapy outcome at week 14, which was 
validated in a publicly available dataset of 20 infliximab-treated CD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Integrative multi-omics analysis reveals early shifts of gene 
expression and DNA methylation as predictors for efficient response to anti-TNF 
treatment. Lack of such signatures might be used to identify patients with IBD 
unlikely to benefit from TNF antagonists at an early time point.

© 2022. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1186/s13073-022-01112-z
PMCID: PMC9509553
PMID: 36153599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Stefan Schreiber has been a consultant for 
AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb, Boehringer Ingelheim, Ferring, Genentech/Roche, 
Janssen, Lilly, Medimmune/AstraZeneca, Novartis, Merck Sharp Dohme, Pfizer, 
Protagonist, Sanofi, Takeda, Theravance, and UCB and is a paid speaker for 
AbbVie, Ferring, Janssen, Merck Sharp Dohme, Novartis, Takeda, and UCB. Philip 
Rosenstiel has been a consultant for Takeda and Omass. All other authors declare 
no competing interests.