1. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2023 May 2;29(5):771-782. doi: 10.1093/ibd/izac246.

The Clinical Response of Upadacitinib and Risankizumab Is Associated With 
Reduced Inflammatory Bowel Disease Anti-TNF-α Inadequate Response Mechanisms.

Wang J(1), Macoritto M(1), Guay H(2), Davis JW(3), Levesque MC(4), Cao X(1).

Author information:
(1)Genomic Research Center, AbbVie Inc, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA.
(2)AbbVie Bioresearch Center, Worcester, MA, 01605, USA.
(3)Genomic Research Center, AbbVie Inc, North Chicago, IL, 60064, USA.
(4)AbbVie Cambridge Research Center, Cambridge, MA, 02139, USA.

BACKGROUND: Janus kinase (JAK) 1 inhibitor upadacitinib and IL-23 inhibitor 
risankizumab are efficacious in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) patients who 
are antitumor necrosis factor (anti-TNF)-α inadequate responders (TNF-IRs). We 
aimed to understand the mechanisms mediating the response of upadacitinib and 
risankizumab.
METHODS: Eight tissue transcriptomic data sets from IBD patients treated with 
anti-TNF-α therapies along with single-cell RNAseq data from ulcerative colitis 
were integrated to identify TNF-IR mechanisms. The RNAseq colon tissue data from 
clinical studies of TNF-IR Crohn's disease patients treated with upadacitinib or 
risankizumab were used to identify TNF-IR mechanisms that were favorably 
modified by upadacitinib and risankizumab.
RESULTS: We found 7 TNF-IR upregulated modules related to innate/adaptive immune 
responses, interferon signaling, and tissue remodeling and 6 TNF-IR upregulated 
cell types related to inflammatory fibroblasts, postcapillary venules, 
inflammatory monocytes, macrophages, dendritic cells, and cycling B cells. 
Upadacitinib was associated with a significant decrease in the expression of 
most TNF-IR upregulated modules in JAK1 responders (JAK1-R); in contrast, there 
was no change in these modules among TNF-IR patients treated with a placebo or 
among JAK1 inadequate responders (JAK1-IR). In addition, 4 of the 6 TNF-IR 
upregulated cell types were significantly decreased after upadacitinib treatment 
in JAK1-R but not among subjects treated with a placebo or among JAK1-IR 
patients. We observed similar findings from colon biopsy samples from TNF-IR 
patients treated with risankizumab.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these data suggest that upadacitinib and risankizumab 
affect TNF-IR upregulated mechanisms, which may account for their clinical 
response among TNF-IR IBD patients.

Plain Language Summary: We identified molecular and cellular mechanisms 
associated with and potentially mediating the response of upadacitinib and 
risankizumab for IBD patients that inadequately responded to anti-TNF-α 
treatment.

© The Author(s) 2022. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Crohn’s 
& Colitis Foundation. All rights reserved. For permissions, please e-mail: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ibd/izac246
PMID: 36515243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]