1. Gut Microbes. 2023 Jan-Dec;15(1):2211501. doi: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2211501.

Dietary palmitoleic acid reprograms gut microbiota and improves biological 
therapy against colitis.

Chen Y(1)(2), Mai Q(1), Chen Z(1), Lin T(1), Cai Y(1), Han J(3), Wang Y(3), 
Zhang M(3), Tan S(1), Wu Z(1), Chen L(1), Zhang Z(1), Yang Y(1), Cui T(1), 
Ouyang B(1), Sun Y(4), Yang L(5), Xu L(1), Zhang S(4), Li J(6), Shen H(7), Liu 
L(8), Zeng L(9), Zhang S(3), Zeng G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Oncology in South China, Collaborative Innovation 
Center for Cancer Medicine, Sun Yat-sen University Cancer Center, Guangzhou, 
China.
(3)Division of Gastroenterology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(4)Hospital of Stomatology, Guanghua School of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, China.
(5)College of Stomatology, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
(6)The Fifth Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen University, Zhuhai, China.
(7)Clinic and Research Center of Tuberculosis, Shanghai Key Laboratory of 
Tuberculosis, Tongji University Shanghai Pulmonary Hospital, Shanghai, China.
(8)Guangzhou Eighth People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, 
China.
(9)Clinical Research Center, Department of Medical Records Management, Guanghua 
School of Stomatology, Hospital of Stomatology, Sun Yat-sen University, 
Guangzhou, China.

Magnitude and diversity of gut microbiota and metabolic systems are critical in 
shaping human health and diseases, but it remains largely unclear how complex 
metabolites may selectively regulate gut microbiota and determine health and 
diseases. Here, we show that failures or compromised effects of anti-TNF-α 
therapy in inflammatory bowel diseases (IBD) patients were correlated with 
intestinal dysbacteriosis with more pro-inflammatory bacteria, extensive 
unresolved inflammation, failed mucosal repairment, and aberrant lipid 
metabolism, particularly lower levels of palmitoleic acid (POA). Dietary POA 
repaired gut mucosal barriers, reduced inflammatory cell infiltrations and 
expressions of TNF-α and IL-6, and improved efficacy of anti-TNF-α therapy in 
both acute and chronic IBD mouse models. Ex vivo treatment with POA in cultured 
inflamed colon tissues derived from Crohn's disease (CD) patients reduced 
pro-inflammatory signaling/cytokines and conferred appreciable tissue 
repairment. Mechanistically, POA significantly upregulated the transcriptional 
signatures of cell division and biosynthetic process of Akkermansia muciniphila, 
selectively increased the growth and abundance of Akkermansia muciniphila in gut 
microbiota, and further reprogrammed the composition and structures of gut 
microbiota. Oral transfer of such POA-reprogrammed, but not control, gut 
microbiota induced better protection against colitis in anti-TNF-α mAb-treated 
recipient mice, and co-administration of POA with Akkermansia muciniphila showed 
significant synergistic protections against colitis in mice. Collectively, this 
work not only reveals the critical importance of POA as a polyfunctional 
molecular force to shape the magnitude and diversity of gut microbiota and 
therefore promote the intestinal homeostasis, but also implicates a new 
potential therapeutic strategy against intestinal or abenteric inflammatory 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/19490976.2023.2211501
PMCID: PMC10202094
PMID: 37203220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: No potential conflict of interest was reported 
by the authors.