1. Nat Commun. 2024 Feb 17;15(1):1470. doi: 10.1038/s41467-024-45855-2.

Mucosal host-microbe interactions associate with clinical phenotypes in 
inflammatory bowel disease.

Hu S(#)(1)(2)(3), Bourgonje AR(#)(1), Gacesa R(1)(2), Jansen BH(1), Björk JR(1), 
Bangma A(1), Hidding IJ(1), van Dullemen HM(1), Visschedijk MC(1), Faber KN(1), 
Dijkstra G(1), Harmsen HJM(4), Festen EAM(1), Vich Vila A(1)(2), Spekhorst 
LM(1)(5), Weersma RK(#)(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(2)Department of Genetics, University of Groningen, University Medical Center 
Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(3)Institute of Precision Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen 
University, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(4)Department of Medical Microbiology, University of Groningen, University 
Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands.
(5)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Medisch Spectrum Twente, 
Enschede, the Netherlands.
(6)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University of Groningen, 
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, the Netherlands. 
r.k.weersma@umcg.nl.
(#)Contributed equally

Disrupted host-microbe interactions at the mucosal level are key to the 
pathophysiology of IBD. This study aimed to comprehensively examine crosstalk 
between mucosal gene expression and microbiota in patients with IBD. To study 
tissue-specific interactions, we perform transcriptomic (RNA-seq) and microbial 
(16S-rRNA-seq) profiling of 697 intestinal biopsies (645 derived from 335 
patients with IBD and 52 from 16 non-IBD controls). Mucosal gene expression 
patterns in IBD are mainly determined by tissue location and inflammation, 
whereas the mucosal microbiota composition shows a high degree of individual 
specificity. Analysis of transcript-bacteria interactions identifies six 
distinct groups of inflammation-related pathways that are associated with 
intestinal microbiota (adjusted P < 0.05). An increased abundance of 
Bifidobacterium is associated with higher expression of genes involved in fatty 
acid metabolism, while Bacteroides correlates with increased metallothionein 
signaling. In patients with fibrostenosis, a transcriptional network dominated 
by immunoregulatory genes is associated with Lachnoclostridium bacteria in 
non-stenotic tissue (adjusted P < 0.05), while being absent in CD without 
fibrostenosis. In patients using TNF-α-antagonists, a transcriptional network 
dominated by fatty acid metabolism genes is linked to Ruminococcaceae (adjusted 
P < 0.05). Mucosal microbiota composition correlates with enrichment of 
intestinal epithelial cells, macrophages, and NK-cells. Overall, these data 
demonstrate the presence of context-specific mucosal host-microbe interactions 
in IBD, revealing significantly altered inflammation-associated gene-taxa 
modules, particularly in patients with fibrostenotic CD and patients using 
TNF-α-antagonists. This study provides compelling insights into host-microbe 
interactions that may guide microbiota-directed precision medicine and fuels the 
rationale for microbiota-targeted therapeutics as a strategy to alter disease 
course in IBD.

© 2024. The Author(s).

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-024-45855-2
PMCID: PMC10874382
PMID: 38368394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: RKW acted as a consultant for Takeda, received 
unrestricted research grants from Takeda, Johnson & Johnson, Tramedico and 
Ferring and received speaker fees from MSD, Abbvie, and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. 
GD received an unrestricted research grant from Takeda and speaker fees from 
Pfizer and Janssen Pharmaceuticals. All other authors declare no competing 
interests.