1. J Crohns Colitis. 2019 May 27;13(6):772-784. doi: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjy215.

Neutrophil Extracellular Traps Sustain Inflammatory Signals in Ulcerative 
Colitis.

Dinallo V(1), Marafini I(1), Di Fusco D(1), Laudisi F(1), Franzè E(1), Di Grazia 
A(1), Figliuzzi MM(1), Caprioli F(2), Stolfi C(1), Monteleone I(3), Monteleone 
G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Systems Medicine, University of 'Tor Vergata', Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, University of Milan, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention, University of 'Tor Vergata', Rome, 
Italy.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: In ulcerative colitis [UC], mucosal damage occurs in areas 
that are infiltrated with neutrophils. The antimicrobial function of neutrophils 
relies in part on the formation of extracellular web-like structures, named 
neutrophil extracellular traps [NETs]. The formation and/or clearance of 
aberrant NETs have been associated with several immune diseases. Here we 
investigated the role of NETs in UC-related inflammation.
METHODS: The expression of NET-associated proteins was evaluated in colonic 
biopsies of patients with Crohn's disease [CD], UC and in normal controls [NC] 
by Western blotting, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry. Colonic 
biopsies of UC patients were analysed before and after anti-tumour necrosis 
factor α [anti-TNF-α] treatment. The capacity of neutrophils to produce NETs 
upon activation was tested in vitro. UC lamina propria mononuclear cells [LPMCs] 
were cultured with NETs in the presence or absence of an extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase-1/2 [ERK1/2] inhibitor and inflammatory cytokine 
induction was assessed by real-time polymerase chain reaction and enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay. We also characterized the contribution of NETs in dextran 
sodium sulfate [DSS]-induced colitis.
RESULTS: NET-associated proteins were over-expressed in inflamed colon of UC 
patients as compared to CD patients and NC. Circulating neutrophils of UC 
patients produced NETs in response to TNF-α stimulation, and reduced expression 
of NET-related proteins and diminished NET formation were seen in patients 
receiving successful treatment with anti-TNF-α. Treatment of UC LPMCs with NETs 
activated ERK1/2, thus enhancing TNF-α and interleukin-1β [IL-1β] production. 
NETs were induced in mice with DSS-colitis and in vivo inhibition of NET release 
attenuated colitis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that NET release occurs in UC and suggest a role for 
NETs in sustaining mucosal inflammation in this disorder.

Copyright © 2019 European Crohn’s and Colitis Organisation (ECCO). Published by 
Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ecco-jcc/jjy215
PMID: 30715224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]