1. Gut. 2021 Jun;70(6):1023-1036. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-321731. Epub 2020 Oct
9.

Deconvolution of monocyte responses in inflammatory bowel disease reveals an 
IL-1 cytokine network that regulates IL-23 in genetic and acquired IL-10 
resistance.

Aschenbrenner D(#)(1), Quaranta M(#)(1)(2), Banerjee S(1)(3), Ilott N(4), Jansen 
J(1)(5), Steere B(6), Chen YH(1), Ho S(6), Cox K(6), Arancibia-Cárcamo CV(1), 
Coles M(4), Gaffney E(5), Travis SP(1), Denson L(7), Kugathasan S(8), Schmitz 
J(6), Powrie F(4), Sansom SN(#)(4), Uhlig HH(#)(9)(10).

Author information:
(1)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, 
John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.
(2)IBD Center, Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Immunopathology, Humanitas 
Clinical and Research Center, Milan, Italy.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, Cambridgeshire, 
UK.
(4)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, 
UK.
(5)Wolfson Centre for Mathematical Biology, University of Oxford, Oxford, 
Oxfordshire, UK.
(6)Immunology Translational Sciences, Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, 
Indiana, USA.
(7)Pediatric Gastroenterology, Cincinnati Childrens Hospital Medical Center, 
Cincinnati, Ohio, USA.
(8)Pediatrics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
(9)Translational Gastroenterology Unit, NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, 
John Radcliffe Hospital, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK 
holm.uhlig@ndm.ox.ac.uk.
(10)Department of Paediatrics, University of Oxford, Oxford, Oxfordshire, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

OBJECTIVE: Dysregulated immune responses are the cause of IBDs. Studies in mice 
and humans suggest a central role of interleukin (IL)-23-producing mononuclear 
phagocytes in disease pathogenesis. Mechanistic insights into the regulation of 
IL-23 are prerequisite for selective IL-23 targeting therapies as part of 
personalised medicine.
DESIGN: We performed transcriptomic analysis to investigate IL-23 expression in 
human mononuclear phagocytes and peripheral blood mononuclear cells. We 
investigated the regulation of IL-23 expression and used single-cell RNA 
sequencing to derive a transcriptomic signature of hyperinflammatory monocytes. 
Using gene network correlation analysis, we deconvolved this signature into 
components associated with homeostasis and inflammation in patient biopsy 
samples.
RESULTS: We characterised monocyte subsets of healthy individuals and patients 
with IBD that express IL-23. We identified autosensing and paracrine sensing of 
IL-1α/IL-1β and IL-10 as key cytokines that control IL-23-producing monocytes. 
Whereas Mendelian genetic defects in IL-10 receptor signalling induced IL-23 
secretion after lipopolysaccharide stimulation, whole bacteria exposure induced 
IL-23 production in controls via acquired IL-10 signalling resistance. We found 
a transcriptional signature of IL-23-producing inflammatory monocytes that 
predicted both disease and resistance to antitumour necrosis factor (TNF) 
therapy and differentiated that from an IL-23-associated lymphocyte 
differentiation signature that was present in homeostasis and in disease.
CONCLUSION: Our work identifies IL-10 and IL-1 as critical regulators of 
monocyte IL-23 production. We differentiate homeostatic IL-23 production from 
hyperinflammation-associated IL-23 production in patients with severe ulcerating 
active Crohn's disease and anti-TNF treatment non-responsiveness. Altogether, we 
identify subgroups of patients with IBD that might benefit from IL-23p19 and/or 
IL-1α/IL-1β-targeting therapies upstream of IL-23.

© Author(s) (or their employer(s)) 2021. Re-use permitted under CC BY. Published 
by BMJ.

DOI: 10.1136/gutjnl-2020-321731
PMCID: PMC8108288
PMID: 33037057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: BS, SH, KC and JS are 
current or previous employees of Eli Lilly. HU received research support or 
consultancy fees from UCB Pharma, Eli Lilly, Boehringer Ingelheim, Pfizer, 
Celgene, OMass and AbVie. FP has received research support or consultancy fees 
from GSK, UCB Pharma, Medimmune, Janssen and Eli Lilly. SPLT has been adviser 
to, in receipt of educational or research grants from, or invited lecturer for 
AbbVie, Amgen, Asahi, Biogen, Boehringer Ingelheim, BMS, Cosmo, Elan, Enterome, 
Ferring, FPRT Bio, Genentech/Roche, Genzyme, Glenmark, GW Pharmaceuticals, 
Janssen, Johnson & Johnson, Eli Lilly, Merck, Novartis, Novo Nordisk, Ocera, 
Pfizer, Shire, Santarus, SigmoidPharma, Synthon, Takeda, Tillotts, Topivert, 
Trino Therapeutics with Wellcome Trust, UCB Pharma, Vertex, VHsquared, Vifor, 
Warner Chilcott and Zeria. SK has received consultancy fees from Janssen and 
Takeda.